Good day I'm Norman Wildberger so we've been
introducing a new way of thinking about matrix
algebra via these things called Maxwell's which
are multi sets of pixels and it turns out that
the usual matrix multiplication is really a
consequence of this more fundamental pixel
multiplication which is just happening at the
level of pixels a pixel is a little two list
consisting of natural numbers and here's how we
multiply two such pixels KL times MN is going to
be the pixel KN if these intermediate ones are
equal if the l equals L and otherwise we get
emptiness nothing at all we like to visualize our
pixels as forming a part of a screen that extends
to the right and down with the standard kind
of labeling 1 1 1 2 1 3 and so on 2 1 2 2 2 3
and so on and there's also these diagonal elements
where the the two coordinates are equal that plays
a particularly interesting and important role
ok we want to understand the geometry of this
multiplication and that's gonna really help us
understand matrix algebra which of course is a key
topic in mathematics so today we're going to have
a rather precise look at how this multiplication
figures in the context of the geometry of this
screen so let's have a good look at a particular
pixel and some of the geometrical aspects that it
determines on our screen so let's consider a pixel
a consisting of the natural numbers K and L on our
screen we can picture that a is a position on our
screen where the row number is K and the column
number is L now this pixel determines some other
things in particular determines our wrong this
row that's labeled or indexed by K will call the
role of a and correspondingly this column indexed
by L will be called the column of a this row and
this column of a determine two additional points
because they meet the diagonal in two additional
points which might coincide with a if a happens to
be on the diagonal for example we're going to call
this point here the role pivot of a so it's the
place where the role of a meets the diagonal it's
the pivot consisting of the pair KK KK of course
funding lis this point here place where the column
of a meets the diagonal will be called the column
pivot of a it's a coordinates R ll so we have the
original pivot we have the role of a we have the
column of a we have the role pivot of a we have
the column pivot of a we also have two secondary
rows and columns this role here the row through
the column pivot of a will be called the transpose
row of a and this column here through the row
pivot of a will be called the transpose column of
a so altogether a determines its row and column
together with a transpose row and column which
pass through the pixel LK which is the transpose
of a so that's a nice sort of fourfold aspect
there's a little square here determined by this
this pixel a so these are interesting and useful
geometrical things associated to the pixel a that
will be involved in the multiplication operation
so now let's look at what happens if we take our
pixel a and multiply it on the right by some
other pixel X what are the possibilities for
getting another pixel so here is a it's the pixel
KL and we want another pixel as a product so let's
suppose that we're multiplying by LM we have
to have these two things equal if we're going
to get something that's non empty so let's
assume that we're multiplying by a pixel X
of the form LM in which case the product is kN
and we want to understand the geometry of that
story and there's sort of two cases that we can
consider so the first case here we have a sitting
somewhere here above the diagonal here is the
row and column of a now have a look at this X
pixel it's Ln what does that mean well it means
that its first entry is L that's saying that it's
actually in this row somewhere the row indexed
by L which is just the transpose row of a so if
we take the column of a which is indexed by L
and go down to the diagonal then this row will
also be indexed by L because everything on the
diagonal is a form ll or mm okay so that's how
we get this transpose well we go down or up
the column of a till we hit the diagonal and
then we go across and this formula is telling us
that in order to get something that's non empty
of the form a times X we have to have X being on
this transpose row so X must be in the transpose
row of a and if it is let's say here then where
is this product a times X well the product is K
where is that well that's also in the role of
a because a has first entry k and this product
has first entry K so this product a times X is
also in the role of a and we're in that row is
it well it's the same column as our point X so
X has second entry N and so ax also has second
entry n that's telling us that if we know where
X is then ax is in the column of X a notice that
X could be anywhere along this transpose row and
wherever X is on that transpose row the ax product
is correspondingly in the same column but just
in the row of a so if X were here then ax would
be here if X is here ax would be here so as X
moves along all possible positions in this row
and it could be is very far out the product ax is
defined and is correspondingly on the same row as
a but just in the same column as X now the story
is exactly the same when a is below the diagonal
so nothing really changes except that the picture
looks a little bit different alright so here is a
here's the row of a and here's the transpose
row of a so in order for a times X to be a
valid pixel we want X to be on this transpose
row of a so in this case hey being here X can
be anywhere on this transpose row and wherever
it is we go in the same column to get a times X
so this is just another way of thinking about the
algebra this is the algebra this is the geometry
it's telling us that if we want to multiply a
times X then the final thing is going to be in
the same row as a same row as a and it's going
to be in the same column as X and that will only
happen when a and X are related by having the
common L here and that's really the condition
that the column of a and the row of X meet at
the same diagonal point now when you're doing
a lot of matrix multiplications in linear algebra
or in group theory or many other related areas of
mathematics ultimately these kinds of geometrical
insights are often quite useful but they're maybe
not spelled out so explicitly in traditional
linear algebra courses because there's the
emphasis on matrices rather than on the pixels
themselves so we have a different orientation
here which allows us to see somewhat different
aspect of things but it's really the same kind
of underlying algebra just we're reviewing it
slightly differently so very useful to absorb
this relatively simple geometry associated with
this kind of product how do form a product a times
X where a is fixed and X is a variable of course
now my symmetry we have to look at the other case
what happens when we take our fixed pixel a and
multiply it on the left by a pixel say Y so what
happens when we look at Y times a so here's a
now on the right and here's a y on the left and
in order for this product to give us something
these two inside ones have to agree so this has
to be a K this can be anything it wants to let's
call it J so if you have J K times K L then the
result is JL and we see that the why JK must be
in the transposed column of a that's the condition
essentially that this second entry of Y agrees
with the first entry of a so let's have a look at
the geometry in this case here where a is up here
here's the row of a here's the column of a here is
the transpose row of a that we've already looked
at in our last life here's a transpose column of
a so this column here consists of things which
have their second entry the same as the first
entry of a this is the row of eights everything
that has first entry K this is the transpose
column of a it's everything that has second
entry K so what we're saying here is that the
Y that we're choosing to multiply with a Y on the
left a on the right has to be from this transpose
column of a and it could be anywhere in there
the other index J is just the index here that
determines what row this Y is in so as we move Y
up and down this column then the product Y a will
move up and down this column because this Y a has
the same row as Y I see the J and the J here agree
that's saying that these two are in the same row
while this Y a and a have the same second entry
it means that they're in the same column so this
is in the same column as a and the same row as Y
so as Y moves up and down this transpose column
of a then correspondingly Y times a moves up and
down the column of a so in such a way that they
why and why are always the same so the product
why a can be any pixel in the column of a the
end result has to be a pixel in the column of
a just as when we multiplied a times X the net
result was a pixel in the row of a so whenever
we multiply a by anything we're getting either a
pixel in the row of a or a pixel in the column of
a the other sort of picture that you might have
is an a below the diagonal the story is the same
there here's the column of a that's where Y a is
going to end up and here's the transpose column of
a obtained by going along the role of a until you
get to the diagonal and then choosing the column
there so y is allowed to be any place on this
transpose column and in fact it could be down
much as it likes to be and correspondingly
Y a is going to be on the column of a but
at the same a row as Y so if Y was up here Y a
would be here why I was here Y a would be here
so it's just a flip of the previous situation
relatively simple but still one has to stare at
it for you know 10 15 minutes and become familiar
with it have a look at some examples say what
happens if a is here and you know what can we
multiply a by to get what so it's good to just
play around with some diagrams so that you become
familiar with what happens when you multiply a by
either an X pixel on the right or Y pixel on the
left so to summarize if we have a pixel a then
if we multiply it by X on the right we're going
to end up with a pixel somewhere on the row of a
and if we multiply it by a pixel why then we'll
end up with something that's on the column of a
so the possible products that we can get by
multiplying a pixel by a lies on this cross
consisting of the row and the column of a so let's
give that a name let's call that the cross of a
that consists of both the row and column of a and
these are the pixels of the forms a X or Y a here
are the a X's here are the Y A's and now of course
when we're doing linear algebra we want to go to
the maxis max those are multi sets of pixels we're
considering not just one pixel but a whole bunch
of pixels with multiplicities and we're going to
agree that to represent a Maxell in this picture
we're going to record the multiplicities that
various pixels occur and just write down those
multiplicities in the corresponding spots of the
pixels so this pixel here maybe it's the pixel 1/5
say then this one here means that there's one
of those this three here means that whatever
pixel this is maybe it's 4/7 then that means
that there's three such pixels 4 7 in the max
lamp now there's 5 of these pixels and it's 5 of
these pixels so suppose that's the Maxell just of
one of these three of those five of those five of
those so such a Maxell M also has rows and columns
namely the rows and columns of its pixels so
associated to this Maxell we could also consider
various rows namely this row this row this row and
I see that I forgotten that row so let me add that
that's also a pixel in our Maxwell so it also gets
a row and I see I've forgotten this column okay
there we go okay so now we have four rows
associated to this Maxell namely the rows
of the pixels that it contains and four
columns also associated to this Maxell and
together we'll say that this is the cross of M
sort of in correspondence with this thing here
so the cross of M consists of all these rows
and columns through the various pixels of AB
now a moment's thought shows that these are
going to be the possible pixels contained in
MN or Oh M if we multiply M by any other pixel
then we just have to multiply that other pixel
by each of the pixels in the Maxell em one
at a time and count the multiplicities of
all the pixels that are generated and if we
multiply on the right something like MN then
we know that at the individual pixel level the
pixels that were getting are all in these rows
the rows are the pixels of M and if we multiply
on the left say om then for each of the pixels
that were multiplying we're gonna get pixels
which lie in the columns now if we multiply
by a max all rather than a single pixel
either on the right or the left well the
story is just a multiset version of that so
getting one pixel on one of these rows we're
getting a whole bunch of pixels but still on
these rows or still on the columns if we're
multiplying on this side so you take this
max Alam and you multiply it by any other
Maxell doesn't matter how big or complicated
it is the result has to be another Maxell
whose support he is contained in this cross
consisting of these rows and these columns
of course if we know about the cross of n then
the thing is symmetrical so the products of the
pixels here have to be in the cross of M and they
also have to be in the cross of end so that gives
a rather stringent constraint on the pixels
that can arise when we multiply two Maxwell's
and so I think you can see the usefulness of this
geometrical point of view that we can sometimes
almost visualize what's happening with this kind
of multiplication of excels or Maxim's now there's
a third way of looking at this multiplication so
of a times B equals C and a B and C are pixels
we've sort of looked at things from the a point of
view and we've looked at things from the B point
of view but we still can look at things from the C
point of view and that gives us another important
insight into what's going on so let's do that now
so we can ask the question given a pixel see what
pairs of pixels A and B will multiply to get
a B equals C so suppose here is our pixel C
and we're interested in how can we find pixels a
and B somewhere on the screen so that a times B
is going to give us C well we already have enough
information to answer this because first of all a
must be in the same row as C because we know that
when we take the pixel a and we multiply on the
right by something then what we get is in the same
row as a so if C is in the same row as a well then
a must be in the same row as C and that means that
the a in this equation has to be from the row of C
similarily be must be in the same column as see
why both because we know that when we take a pixel
B and we multiply on the left by some other pixel
that what we're getting is in the same column as B
so that means that C must be in the same column
as B but that means that B must be in the same
column ax C so the B that works in this equation
has to be in the column of C so we want to find
an A and a B that multiply to C we know that we
have to choose a in this row and B in this column
anything else is a waste of time well you're not
going to get a product that multiplies to the
pixels C okay but there's one more thing that's
required so for example suppose that we choose
an A in the row of C and now ask okay how are we
going to find the B that multiplies together with
this a to give us C well remember that from the
a point of view if we want something to multiply
the a we need to look at something which is
in the transpose row of a this B must be in
the transpose row of a so here's a we go up its
column to the diagonal to the pivot column pivot
of it then the rogue through there is where B must
come from we can only multiply a by something in
this row so this B that we're looking for must be
in this row but we've also just said that it also
must be in this column so there's only one place
where it can be namely right there in the meat of
this row and this column so I've said that here
so for each pixel a in the row of C we pick an
a in this row the corresponding B must be the meat
of the column of C and the transpose row of a so
a moved from here over slightly to the left for
example the corresponding B would still have to
be in the column of C but it would now be in the
transpose row of this thing which would be there
so as a moves in this direction the corresponding
B would have to move in this direction and as a
moves in this direction the corresponding B
would have to move in this direction if a was
far out here B would have to be far down here
or we can interchange the story and say that if
we know B then a must be the meat of the row of
C and the transpose column of B that's just the
symmetrical version of it so let me illustrate
that reasoning in the explicit kind of example
here so here's our screen and now I've separated
it into little pixels so they really do look like
pixels there is the pixel 1 1 X 2 1 2 pixel 1 3
and so on and we've chosen a particular pixel C
right there so let's ask the question what are the
various products of pixels that will multiply to
get C we're looking for an A and a B that multiply
gets C so what we've just determined is that a has
to be in this row and B has to be in this column
so I suppose we choose the first a in this row
called a 1 there it is it's actually the pixel
3 1 but we don't really care about what it is
exactly so corresponding to this a 1 what is the
B fix all that we have to choose in order that
the product of this a 1 with the corresponding B
gives us exactly C well we have to go up here to
the diagonal and then across until we meet the
column of C that's exactly that one there so the
first pixel in this row has to multiply with the
first pixel in this column to get C so a1 times
b1 he we'll see and now the second pixel a two
so we go up the column of a to get its transpose
row and then across there to get B 2 so this a 2
is going to multiply with this B 2 and give us C
and then this a 3 is going to multiply by B 3 ok
B 3 is the third one here which happens to be C
okay but let's call it B 3 for consistency so a
3 times B 3 will also give C then a 4 times B 4
will also give C a 5 which is also C times B 5
will give C a 6 times B 6 will give C a 7 times
B 7 will give C and so on we can keep going along
here and multiplying the corresponding a with the
corresponding B and each stage we're gonna get
C so this is the maximal equivalent of the row
vector times column vector multiplication that
is so familiar in linear algebra the idea that
in order to do matrix multiplication we have
to multiply rows with columns and the way we
multiply them is to take this times this Plus
this times this Plus this times this Plus this
times this and so on so at the level of maxwell's
instead of pixels we would have multiplicities
here maybe there'd be a 2 here and a 5 here
representing two of these and five of these
and maybe there was a three year and a seven
there so when we're multiplying this pixel
times this pixel we really have to multiply
to these lines with three of those so it'll
be two of these times three of those will give
all together six of those that's why we have to
multiply two times three and then if that's
five and seven whatever I said so five times
seven that'll be the number of pairs pixels here
times pixels there that give us a C again that's
why we have to go this times this Plus this times
this Plus this times this Plus this times this
Plus this times this etc to get the coefficient
of that pixel in the product so this is just a
restatement of their familiar multiplication in
matrix algebra but it's a it's a different story
really because we're operating now in a free
kind of domain where there's no more bounds
on the extent of this Maxell or these Maxwell's
we're not restricting ourselves to matrices of a
particular kind here these are general rules
that apply whenever we multiply to Maxwell's
okay so I hope you've absorbed that we're now
ready to practice some maximum multiplication
all right so let's have a look at some maximum
multiplication I'd like to start with something
relatively simple and something with some
pattern to it so that it's possible to sort
of see or look for some generalizations so I'm
going to consider very simple kinds of Maxwell's
that just are uniform over some little rectangle
in fact some corner rectangle so let's consider
this Maxell here times this Maxell here this
is a picture of the maxilla the axial multi-set
would be the pixels 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 1 2 2 and 2
3 and here the Maxell would be the multi set
consisting of the pixels 1 1 1 2 2 1 and 2 2 so
we have 6 pixels here in this multi set we have
4 pixels here the way we multiply these maxwell's
is we have to multiply each of these 6 pixels by
each of those 4 pixels so there's 24 possible
products many of them think most of them will
give us emptiness only some of them will actually
give us legitimate pixels which end up configuring
in the product so let's adopt that position that
we were looking at just in the previous line and
ask ourselves let's say this in here how can we
figure out what the multiplicity of the pixel of
one one is in the product so if C is one one so
the only way of getting this thing as a product
is to take something from its row in the first
max'll times something in its column in the second
Maxell now we saw that the only way of getting
this thing here is actually take the first thing
in this first row times the first thing in this
first column or the second thing here times the
second one or the third here times the third
one and so on so there's a product 1 times 1
that will give us one of these and there's also
the product of this one times this one which
will give us one of these and there's no other
possible products that will give us the pixel
1 1 so there's altogether two ways of getting the
pixel 1 one is a product that just corresponds to
the multiplication of this row times this vector
in the usual linear algebra story similarly over
here this two results taking this row this first
row times this second column because this is the
one to entry so it's row is this one and its
columns this one and so this times this Plus
this times this Plus then there's only zeros
this one is this times this Plus this times
this and zeros this one is this times this Plus
this 1 times this and zeros and there can't be
anything else because the product of this max'll
with anything else has to be supported in the rows
of this Maxell remember that when we take a pixel
and we multiply it by something on the right we're
getting something in the same row so if you take
all of these pixels and multiplied by anything
at all on the right we're getting something
that cumulates in the same role as as those
things so the product has to be in the first
two rows and similarly when we multiply this
max'll buy anything on the left what we get has
to have elements only in the same columns as we
have here so in other words only the first two
columns can arise so if we combine those two
facts we know that we multiply this times this
we know that what we're getting has to have the
property that all the pixels are contained in
the first two rows and they're contained in the
first two columns so that means that they're
in fact contained in this little 2x2 square
so similarly for this one here here's a similar
kind of bigger Maxell the uniform support over
this little rectangle it's a corner rectangle five
by three my time is this one which is a two by
four and so we have various possible products
so for example this thing here this two where
does it come from well we would take the first I
mean the second row because that's in the second
row and we would take the fourth column over here
lift them up apply the second row here with the
fourth column there we go one times one plus one
times one and then there's no more nonzero things
for a total of two okay and here's something
to tell us that this kind of thinking doesn't
necessarily restrict to just rectangles which are
corner rectangles so here's somewhat of a more
general rectangle it's kind of floating a little
bit more in the middle this one here has a row
of zeros above it we multiply this max all with
this Maxell then you can check that what you're
gonna get is this max all over here that's the
same kind of story so say to get the coefficient
there we would look at the row that corresponds to
that pixel in the left hand max'll and the column
that corresponds to it in the second Maxwell so
we have to multiply this third row here with this
call him here so that's zero times zero plus one
times one plus one times zero etc to give us one
so all these empty blanks are of course zeros we
could put zeros in here but it's not going to add
any information okay so it's already a little
bit interesting so there's now an exercise to
play around yourselves with doing some maximal
multiplication perhaps with just relatively
simple maxwell's that are supported on rectangles
but maybe the rectangles don't have to be corner
rectangles they can be sort of floating anywhere
you can experiment with different possibilities
and see if you can figure out a kind of rule or
figure out the pattern so that you could predict
what the product of any two rectangles is without
actually having to go through the thing step by
step but it's certainly useful to work it out
step by step really examine what's going on
at the pixel level this is a really fundamental
multiplication in in mathematics okay so beyond
the arithmetic of numbers we have the arithmetic
of paly numbers or polynomials and then the next
step is the arithmetic of matrices there's
now taken over by the arithmetic of maxwell's
so this is a very very fundamental and huge
step to extend our notion of arithmetic from
one-dimensional arrays to two-dimensional arrays
we're now multiplying two-dimensional arrays
or maxwell's here and it's very important and
it's such a vital ingredient in many topics in
mathematics so I hope you enjoy the freedom here
that you have that you don't have to worry about
the size of the underlying matrices the matrices
themselves are only playing a secondary role their
only way of picturing Maxwell's it's really the
Maxwell's themselves which are the main objects
and here's a bunch of examples of another kind
of Maxell multiplication involving objects with
sort of triangular in shape these arm axles that
are also relatively simple they'll have uniform
multiplicities that's relatively simple but we're
considering things that have a sort of triangular
aspect so two of the sides are vertical and
horizontal and the other one is sloping down
at a slope of one parallel to our diagonal and
here one one one zero that's an upper triangular
kind of thing here's a sort of a lower triangular
max'll and you can check that the result is 2 1 1
1 and here with this lower triangular one and
this upper triangular one so exactly the same
2 is involved there but now in the opposite order
we get something that looks a little bit different
one one one two one two here we have a little
bit of a bigger one there's an upper triangular
one this is sort of corner justified and here's a
lower triangular one also corner justified and we
see that we get this particular somewhat Pleasant
little pattern for the product of the maxilla here
is another example a bigger lower triangular and
here's an upper triangular one that's shifted a
little bit so it's no longer justified it's no
longer a corner object it's sort of floating
a little bit but still its diagonal is on the
main diagonal of the screen and it's a product
you can verify see if I've done it correctly is
this Pleasant little square here with fringe of
ones and the fringe of two is a fringe of 3s
and a fringe of four kind of the opposite of
kind of thing that we saw in this one here so
already just in this sort of simple kind of
very specialized subcase we're only multiplying
upper triangular or lower triangular maxwell's
uniformed we can see there's some kind of comment
toriel thing going on there's a pattern to to
discover and play around with and so you can get
a little bit of experience with pixel and maximum
multiplication by trying to figure out if you can
find some pattern that allows you to predict what
happens if you multiply two triangular Maxwell's
and you might try what happens if we multiply a
upper triangular by another upper triangular
one for example one of the possibilities what
happens can you predict what happens alright
in our next video we of course want to say
a little bit more about this max'll algebra and
connect again a little bit more with traditional
matrix algebra hope you'll join me for that
i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening